RFD - Client Side encryption of session data (#7044)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0030-client-side-session-encryption.md

Integrating the key wrapping algorithm would require
 1. Selecting an implementation (or implementing our own, but probably not) of RFC3394
 2. Wrapping the RFC in a type 
   * that knows the master key, and 
   * implements the `s3crypto.ContentCipherBuilder` and `s3crypto.CipherDataDecrypter` interfaces
 3. Registering the `CipherDataDecrypter` in an [`s3crypto.CryptoRegistry`](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/sdk-for-go/api/service/s3/s3crypto/#CryptoRegistry) so that the S3 SDK can use it to decrypt objects on download.

### Integration

The actual integration build down to a straightforward exercise in abstraction:

1. Define a common interface for session uploading and downloading
2. Wrap the Key wrapper, Crypto registry, the en- & decryption clients, etc into something that exposes that interface
3. Wrap the existing `s3manager` in something that exposes the same interface
4. Swap out the implementation based on the existence of the master key in the config file

## Alternative Implementations

### Custom KeyPadder

> If we are not interested in preserving compatibility with the AWS SDK for other languages, we can easily define a custom key wrapeer using the PCKS7 padder in the AWS SDK. This would remove the need for the AESWrap implementation, but would also make the encryption format Teleport-specific. Other AWS clients would not be able to interpret the at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we are not interested in preserving compatibility with the AWS SDK for other languages, we can easily define a custom key wrapper using the PCKS7 padder in the AWS SDK. This would remove the need for the AESWrap implementation, but would also make the encryption format Teleport-specific. Other AWS clients would not be able to interpret the encrypted session data at all.
```

Author: Obsoleted in rewrite

## What

Provide encrypted-at-rest session recordings that do not rely on a cloud provider's server-side encryption.

## Why

Most, if not all, cloud storage providers offer an encrypted storage solution where data is automatically encrypted on the server side during upload and decrypted again during download. By necessity, the key(s) used to encrypt the data on the server side _must_ be known to cloud storage provider. 

Some clients, for whatever reason, do not feel comfortable sharing their encryption key(s) with a cloud provider and would prefer a client-side solution where the encryption key(s) do not leave their possession.

This RFD gives proposes a solution based on envelope encryption with a locally-supplied master key. It fits neatly over the existing session recording mechanism outlined in [RFD-002](./0002-streaming.md).

## Details

### Proposed Solution

 1. Create a new `V2` slice format that includes
    1. a slice flagset to indicate whether the payload is encrypted
    2. an optional encrypted envelope around the gzipped slice payload
 2. Adding configuration items to to the teleport config file to supply keys.

#### Cipher selection

> Both content and content-encryption keys will be encrypted with AES256/GCM. No user selection of the cipher suite will be permitted. 

Reviewer 2: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/parquet-serde.html

 4. Pass the resulting plaintext (i.e. a gzipped series of protobuf records) along as per the existing recording system.

Each slice may be encrypted with a different master key, even in the same file. This allows multiple nodes with different encryption keys to write to the same session. The session will be played back as long as the node managing the playback has access to all the keys used for the session.

Reusing the existing recording machinery also allows session files in transit to be recorded at rest whenever they are stored locally on a node (e.g. async recording).

#### V2 Proto Recording Format

[RFD-002](./0002-streaming.md), shows that a recording file is a sequence of semi-independent _slices_. Each slice contains a gzipped sequence of session events serialised into the protobuf wire format. Each slice is at least (and probably close to) 5MiB for all but the _last_ slice in a recording, which may be any size. No upper bound on slice size is currently enforced.

The V2 format will add a `flags` field after the version header. For consistency's sake, this will be another Uint64. The new header will look this:

> | Field Size (bytes) | Encoding |         Interpretation              |

Reviewer 2: specifically wondering, what would be required to have this supported out of the box:

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/parquet-serde.html

and 

https://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/compression-formats.html

> | Field Size (bytes) | Encoding |         Interpretation              |

Reviewer 2: @xacrimon here is what comes to mind:

* Without encryption, if we find a way to present each independent chunk as a part of the larger gzip/bzip or SNAPPY, then the actual chunk to be in parquet format, then anyone unpacking the resulting .snappy S3 file will see a very simple archive file with parquet inside.

This will require some wizardry during creation of chunks, e.g. creating a special padding parquet event at the end perhaps or similar. I think it's worth exploring. Now, the client side encryption can easily break this compatibility, if it creates its own, independent envelope with encryption, after the data has been gzipped. 

I think it's worth discussing at this stage with @tcsc and may be prototyping together, so we end up with something that we won't have to rewrite again. cc @russjones.

> | Field Size (bytes) | Encoding |         Interpretation              |

Reviewer 2: For example, snappy supports frames, designed for streaming over HTTP chunks:

https://github.com/google/snappy/blob/master/framing_format.txt

If we represent each slice as a snappy frame, and the internal contents as parquet, the resulting concatenated S3 file, could be a proper snappy parquet file.

Then the client side encryption will encrypt snappy frames using go's envelopes and may be snappy frames again with no additional compression? Then the resulting encrypted file will be a snappy archive of encrypted snappy frames :)

Something like that could work, what do you think?

> | Field Size (bytes) | Encoding |         Interpretation              |

Reviewer 3: That seems doable. Parquet SerDe doesn't look compatible with encrypted files however. Compressing snappy frames looks really neat and it looks like one of the better options.

 * Using [Google Tink](https://developers.google.com/tink)

##### Defining our own
- **Pro:** Can be implemented using the tools in the standard `crypto` and `crypto/cipher` packages
- **Pro:** Easier to verify for FIPS compliance as we don't have to wade through 3rd party code
- **Con:** Have to write our own envelope encrypter, envelope format de-/serialiser & keystore. 

None of this is particularly *difficult* (and we can gain a ***lot*** of useful inspiration from Tink), but it is worth noting that it needs to be done.

##### Tink
 - **Pro:** Integrated key management solution, should we later want to use a cloud-based key manager (e.g. Cloud Key Manager, AWS KMS) to manage master keys
 - **Pro:** Pre-defined & implemented envelope format (uses protobuf under the hood, adds ~130B per slice)
 - **Pro:** Plumbing between envelope decrypter and keystore is provided
 - **Pro:** More intuitive API than `crypto` & `crypto/cipher`
 - **Con:** Managing transitive third-party dependencies. Getting the PoC running was a challenge due to differing updated GRPC 
 - **Con:** Does not support a locally-provided key out of the box. We still have to write our own keystore integration.

>  - **Con:** Harder to assert FIPS compliance. Unknown how it will react to `boringcrypto` builds.

Reviewer 2: Should be something we can quickly test? I'd prefer to avoid building our own envelope format for sure

Reviewer 4: @tcsc Sent you a doc on how I verified this last time around.

Author: I've verified that
1. Tink-enabled `teleport` builds with the amd64/fips build container
2. The boring crypto symbols appear in the unstripped `teleport` binary (as per @russjones' doc above)
3. Recordings are encrypted in the boringcrypto build of my proof-of-concept `teleport`
4. The Tink crypto primitive API defers to the stdlib `crypto/`packages for implementation (via manual audit)
That's probably enough for now.
